<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/loose.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
      xmlns:h="http://java.sun.com/jsf/html"
      xmlns:ui="http://java.sun.com/jsf/facelets"
      xmlns:f="http://java.sun.com/jsf/core"
      xmlns:p="http://primefaces.org/ui">
    <h:head>
        <title>Transcription factor classification</title>
        <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
        <h:outputStylesheet name="css/screen.css"/>
    </h:head>
    <body>

        <h1>Classification of Transcription Factors in Mammalia</h1>
        <h2><a href="index.jsf">Back to TFClass</a></h2>
        <div style="width:75%; margin-left: 12.5%">
            <p>
                <b>Transcription factors</b>, in a somewhat simplified definition, are
                proteins that regulate transcription by binding to specific sequence
                elements in regulatory genome regions such as promoters, enhancers etc.
            </p>
            <p>
                <b>TFClass</b> is a classification of eukaryotic transcription factors
                based on the characteristics of their DNA-binding domains (DBDs). It comprises
                four general levels (superclass, class, family, subfamily) and two
                levels of instantiation (genus and molecular species). Two of them
                (subfamily and factor species) are optional. More detailed explanations
                about the classification scheme and its criteria are given
                <a href="http://www.edgar-wingender.de/TFClass_schema.html" target="_blank">here</a>.
                The <a href="suppl/tfclass.ttl.gz">ontology</a> is available in the Turtle format.
            </p>
            <p>
                So far, TFClass comprises human transcription factors (TFs) and their
                mammalia orthologs. An earlier version of the full classification of human 
                TFs as html  document can also be obtained
                <a href="http://www.edgar-wingender.de/huTF_classification.html" target="_blank">here</a>,
                that of their mouse orthologs
                <a href="http://www.edgar-wingender.de/muTF_classification-1.html" target="_blank">here</a>.
            </p>
            <h2>About the interface:</h2>
            <p>
                The ontology is shown in the left part of the interface. To browse 
                the classification, an individual taxon can be opened by clicking 
                on the arrow head in front of it; clicking again closes all taxa 
                that have been opened. On top of the tree, there is a search window 
                with an auto-complete function for the factor names. The link 
                underneath directs to the freely accessible TRANSFAC&reg; FACTOR table.
            </p><p>
                In the right (main) part of the interface, additional information 
                about the selected node is provided. For a 
                <span class="function_ref">Superclass (node with a one-digit identifier)</span>, 
                a general definition is given as well as the numbers of biological 
                species which have known TFs within this superclass and the number 
                of genera defined within this superclass.
            </p><p>
                For a <span class="function_ref">Class (node with a two-digits identifier)</span>, 
                a definition is also provided, followed by the number of species 
                and TF genera subsumed here. A sequence logo illustrates the 
                most-conserved residues in the corresponding type of DBD. The table 
                underneath gives links to the FASTA files with all sequences of 
                the TFs of this node, on the left for the DBDs, on the right for 
                the full-length proteins. Underneath are thumbnails of the 
                corresponding phylogenetic trees of the whole sequence set (top) 
                or for a “slim selection” of only four species, usually human, 
                mouse, cow and <i>Monodelphis</i>.
            </p><p>
                A <span class="function_ref">Family</span> (or 
                <span class="function_ref">Subfamily; three- or four-digit identifiers, resp.</span>) 
                node has a similar structure as a Class entry (see above), except 
                that instead of a definition, an (idealized) consensus DNA 
                sequence may be given to which TFs of this family preferably bind, 
                followed by a link to the list of predicted binding sites in the 
                human, mouse, cow or dog genome (see below). 
            </p><p>
                A <span class="function_ref">Genus node (five-digit identifier)</span>
                has as “General” information only the number of biological species 
                that have a known TF of this group. Underneath, all these species 
                are listed along with the available links to external databases 
                and a sketch visualizing the position of the DBD within the 
                canonical molecule and its splice variants as defined by UniProt. 
                On top of this list, links are given to jump straight to the human, 
                murine or rat entry. The order or entries in the list can be 
                customized and will be preserved throughout the active session.


            </p>    <p>
                <span class="function_ref">Show predicted binding sites ("Seed sites"):</span>
                Linked to (sub)family entities, if present. Clicking this option 
                will open a selection list of all positional weight matrices that 
                are connected with any of the TFs in this (sub)family. Choosing 
                one of them will open the complete list of potential binding sites 
                that (a) are located in the 1kb upstream region of human genes, 
                (b) are conserved among human, mouse, dog and cow, and (c) belong 
                to the x% best scoring sites (x to be chosen by the user, default 
                is 5%; score is the Match score, as described in Kel et al., 2003). 
            </p><p>
                <span class="function_ref">Protein expression (human only)</span>: Displayed in a separate overlay. 
                Based on the information provided by the 
                <a href="http://www.proteinatlas.org/" target="_blank">Human Protein Atlas</a>,
                expression sources (organs, tissues) have been linked to the
                <a href="http://cytomer.bioinf.med.uni-goettingen.de" target="_blank">Cytomer</a> ontology.
            </p>
            <h2 name="citation">Citation:</h2>
            <p>
                <b>When referring to this classification, please cite:</b>
            </p><p>
                Wingender E, Schoeps T, Haubrock M, Krull M and Dönitz J.:<br/>
                TFClass: expanding the classification of human transcription factors to their mammalian orthologs.<br/>
                Nucleic Acids Res. 46, D343-D347 (2018). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkx987
                <a href="https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/46/D1/D343/4566021" target="_blank">link</a>
            </p><p>
                <b>Previous publications:</b>
            </p><p>
                Wingender, E., Schoeps, T., Haubrock M. and Dönitz, J.:<br/>
                TFClass: a classification of human transcription factors and their rodent orthologs.<br/>
                Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D97-102 (2015). doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1064
                <a href="https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/43/D1/D97/2437186/" target="_blank">link</a>
            </p><p>
            </p><p>
                Wingender, E., Schoeps, T. and Dönitz, J.:<br/>
                TFClass: An expandable hierarchical classification of human transcription factors.<br/>
                Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D165-D170 (2013). doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1123
                <a href="http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/41/D1/D165.long" target="_blank">link</a>
            </p><p>
                Wingender, E.: Criteria for an updated classification of human transcription factor DNA-binding domains.<br/>
                J. Bioinform. Comput. Biol. 11, 1340007 (2013). doi: 10.1142/S0219720013400076
                <a href="http://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S0219720013400076" target="_blank">link</a>
            </p><p>
                Wingender, E.: Classification scheme of eukaryotic transcription factors. <br/>
                Mol. Biol. 31, 584-600 (1997); Mol. Biol. Engl. Tr. 31, 483-497 (1997).
                <a href="http://www.edgar-wingender.de/resources/054_Wingender_Mol.%20Biol_v31_p584.pdf" target="_blank">link</a>

            </p>
        </div>
        <h2><a href="index.jsf">Back to TFClass</a></h2>
    </body>
</html>